HENRY V by WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
ACT 4, SCENE 3: THE ENGLISH CAMP


KING HENRY V:

What's he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin:
If we are mark'd to die, we are enow
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
God's will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires:
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England:
God's peace! I would not lose so great an honour
As one man more, methinks, would share from me
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart; his passport shall be made
And crowns for convoy put into his purse:
We would not die in that man's company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the feast of Crispian:
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say 'To-morrow is Saint Crispian:'
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
And say 'These wounds I had on Crispin's day.'
Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day: then shall our names.
Familiar in his mouth as household words
Harry the king, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be remember'd;
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition:
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's day.

.
.
.
.
.
.
Dialogue by others
.
.
.
.
.
.

KING HENRY V:

I pray thee, bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the lion's skin
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves; upon the which, I trust,
1Shall witness live in brass of this day's work:
1And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
1Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
1They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them,
1And draw their honours reeking up to heaven;
1Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
1The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
1Mark then abounding valour in our English,
1That being dead, like to the bullet's grazing,
1Break out into a second course of mischief,
1Killing in relapse of mortality.
1Let me speak proudly: tell the constable
1We are but warriors for the working-day;
1Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch'd
1With rainy marching in the painful field;
1There's not a piece of feather in our host--
1Good argument, I hope, we will not fly--
1And time hath worn us into slovenry:
1But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
1And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
1They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
1The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads
1And turn them out of service. If they do this,--
1As, if God please, they shall,--my ransom then
1Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labour;
1Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald:
1They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
1Which if they have as I will leave 'em them,
1Shall yield them little, tell the constable.
